In this video, we'll learn about our
first STL adapter container, the stack.
The stack is a last-in,
first-out data structure.
It's an adapter because it's
implemented in terms of already
existing STL containers.
Since all operations on a stack
happen on only one end, the top.
We can easily implement a stack based
on any container that has a back.
These are vector, list, and deque.
So, the way that the stack methods
work is they use delegation.
And they call the back, push
back, and pop back methods
of the underlying container.
Stacks have wide applications in
computer science, and the STL provides
a simple concise implementation.
You can think of a stack as a stack
of books or a stack of plates.
If we stack plates one on top of
the other, we can't pull out a
plate from the middle or from the
bottom, instead we add plates at the
top and remove them from the top.
Since stacks are limited to
insertions and deletions only one end.
Iterators really don't make
sense and they're not supported.
So, we can't use stacks
with STL algorithms.
In order to use the stack container, we
have to include the stack header file.
The stack provides a handful of methods
that have well-defined behavior.
The push method inserts an
element at the top of the stack.
The pop method removes an element
from the top of the stack.
The top method accesses the top element
of the stack but it doesn't remove it.
Finally, we have the empty and
size methods that we've already
seen in the other STL containers.
Since the stack is an adapter
class, we can choose what
underlying container will be used
when we create our stack objects.
In the first example, I'm
providing no information about
the underlying container, so the
STL will use a deque by default.
You can see in the next three
examples that I'm explicitly
stating which underlying container
to use in the template parameter.
So, let's see how the
push method works.
Suppose we have a stack of
integers named ‘s’ and it's empty.
When we push 10 onto the stack,
we add 10 at the top of the stack.
You can see the top of the stack
is the shaded box in the diagrams.
We then push 20, now 20
becomes the top of the stack.
Finally, we push 30 and the 30
becomes the new top of the stack.
Once we have a stack that
contains elements, we can access
the element at the top of the
stack with the top method.
This returns a reference
to the element at the top.
It does not remove it.
In this example, s.top
returns 30, which we display.
Now, if we pop the stack, the
element at the top is removed.
In this case, the 30 and now the 20
becomes the new top of the stack.
If I pop the stack again, the
20 is removed, and now the 10
is the new top of the stack.
If we call the size method for s
here, it will display 1 since there's
just one element left in the stack.
As you can see the stack
api is very straightforward.
But a stack is extremely useful,
and it's used in computer science
to solve many types of problems.
Let's head over to the ide,
we'll see some stack examples.
Okay, so I'm back in the ide.
I'm in the section 20
workspace in the stack project.
This is a really simple example.
There's not really a lot
we can do with a stack.
Push, pop and top, that's about it.
So, let's go over a few examples here.
I'm including stack right here.
So, I'm going to use it. I'm also including vector list, just
I'm going to show you how you can
create those stacks based on vector
and the list underlying container.
So, that's the only
reason I'm including them.
I'm really not using it.
I just wanted to show you how
you would declare it here.
But let's talk about
this template function.
This is the one that's
going to display a stack.
We can't use iterators with
stacks, so there's no real
way to display a stack easily.
The only way to display a stack
is to let's say, we've got a
stack here with the 10 and a
20, and I want to display it.
I need to get the top display it, pop
it, get the top, display it, pop it.
So, it's a destructive process.
Because of that I'm passing
in this stack by value.
I don't want to upset the stack
that's being passed into me at all.
I don't want to modify it at all.
So, that's making a copy, and
what I'm doing over here is
I'm destroying that copy which is fine.
Once I finish this function, the
stack that's being passed into
me has not been modified at all.
And you can see the code,
it's pretty straightforward.
This is a template function.
There's the type right here.
We're using integer
stacks in this example.
And while the stack is not empty, I'm
getting the top element of the stack.
Then I'm deleting it from the
stack, and then I'm displaying it.
That's it. So, that's just going to display
my stack, and you can see the
output over here and I'll go
over that in just a second.
Alright, so let me scroll up.
And there's no tests here.
It's just domain which is
pretty straightforward.
Let's go over these examples here.
Here, I'm creating a stack of integers.
I call it ‘s’, that's the one.
We're going to use in these examples.
But I can also create s1, s2, and
s3, that are stacks of integers
but the underlying container
would be a vector, a list, or
a deque, whatever you choose.
On line 25 here, you can see that
I'm just not providing anything in
which case it defaults to a deque.
Alright, so let's push some values
on the stack, and pop them off, and
play around with it a little bit.
Let me just scroll up just a
little bit right about there.
Okay, so I've got that stack
s that I've already defined.
And what I want to do is I want to
use a range base for loop that's
going to loop over this range right
here, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and it's going to
push those numbers onto that stack s.
Remember, let's assume that
this is my stack right here.
The numbers are being pushed
this way and then popped off.
So, first, I'm going to
push 1, and then 2, and then
3, and then 4, and then 5.
So, that's the situation right now.
Then I'm going to call display.
Remember, display's going to
make a copy of this stack,
it's not going to mess with this one.
And what it's going to do is it's going
to pop the elements off the stack.
So, it's going to pop off the 5,
the 4, the 3, the 2, and the 1.
Remember, everything
happens up here at the top.
So, it's going to display
exactly what I just said.
5,4,3,2,1, you can see 5 was the
top of the stack in that copy.
Now if I pop two elements off
of this stack, the 5 and the 4.
I'm sorry, I missed one step
right here, let's back up to that.
In this case, I'm pushing 100 onto the
stack, so I'm pushing 100 onto here.
And then I'm displaying
that stack again.
And now, you can see
that the 100 is there.
The 100 is now at the top of the stack.
Now I'm popping off two elements
off the stack, the 100 and the 5
are being popped off the stack.
So, the top of my stack now is the 4.
And when I display my stack
right here on line 39, you can
see it's displaying 4,3,2 and 1.
In this code here on line 41, I'm just
looping while the stack is not empty.
So, as long as the stack is not
empty, I'm deleting stuff in it.
This is how we can clear a stack.
There is no dot clear
method for a stack.
So, this is how you would clear it.
You would just have to
pop everything off of it.
Then when we display the stack here
on line 43, we get the empty stack
which is exactly what we expected.
What's the size of that stack?
It better be zero.
Alright, because it's empty and that's
exactly what it is, right here, zero.
And the last thing I wanted to show you
is suppose, I push 10 onto the stack.
Remember that stack is gone.
It's empty now.
So, let's say I wanted to push 10 onto
the stack just like I did right here.
And then I display the stack.
I get back at 10.
Top returns a reference
to the top of the stack.
The top of the stack
right now is the 10.
It's a reference, so I can modify it.
I could say s.top is 100.
So, I can change that top to 100 now.
So, when I display the stack, you can
see it's displaying 100 right here.
Okay, I think that's about it.
That's really all there is to a stack.
It's a very, very, specific data
structure that we're going to use.
When you use it, all you care
about is pushing, popping, top
checking to see if it's empty.
That's it.
You're not concerned
with anything else.
Those are the only methods that
are important and those are
only methods you actually want.
If you've got a stack that gives
you a bunch of other methods,
it's not really a stack, and
then, you know, be careful.
Because you don't want to have a stack
of integers, let's say 10, 20, and 30.
And that whatever thing you're
using that you think might be a
stack is letting you have access
to these guys that's not a stack.
Stack everything happens
right up here at the top.
Sometimes, you'll see these data
structures defined by programmers
that have pushes, and pops, and
insert stack, and all kinds of things.
And it's not really a
stack, it's just a mess.
Okay, in this case, this is a true stack.
It supports exactly what a
stack is supposed to support.
Alright, in the next video,
we'll talk about the queue
which is a waiting line.
And of course, here you can see that
the last one in was the first one out.
That's why the stack is
called a LIFO data structure.
The queue is called a
FIFO data structure.
So, the first one in is the first
one out like a waiting line or
a waiting queue, And that's what
we'll talk about in the next video.